# Interview With Ryan Cash - Alto's Adventure

Alto's Adventure is one of my all time favorite iOS games. I get lost
in its artistic presentation and simple game mechanic. Ryan and I
cross paths on Twitter after a one of mention about how awesome Alto
is. After that we've been shooting the bull over email here and
there. I asked if he would let me interview him about his game. Being
the awesome person he is, he said yes. You can read about who Ryan is
at http://ryancash.net/colophon

>Ryan. I loved the feeling of "flow" I got with playing Alto's
>Adventure. It reminded me of the Sega Saturn game Nights into
>Dreams. Just a comment about. Feel free to respond.

Glad to hear this! We actually put a huge emphasis on how the game's
"flow" felt. So it's really cool that you're specifically calling that
out! I think that a game's flow (especially in a game that's supposed
to be viscerally rewarding) is incredibly important. We spent quite a
bit of time making sure this felt right.

>What technologies/frameworks did you use to build Alto?

Alto's Adventure is built in Unity3D.

>How long did it take to build?

Just over 2 years, from idea to the launch.

>During the sale and development of Alto, what was one of your
>happiest moments?

There have been a ton of happy and exciting moments, but I think the
things that have been the most rewarding to see have been the emails
we've received about how the game has helped people cope through an
injury or tough mental situation/illness, and then on the other side
of things, the photos and stories we've heard of really young kids
playing and enjoying the game.

>Your saddest moments?

I don't know if there have been any sad moments, but there have
definitely been stressful moments where I'd wondered how the game
would do before it was finished – countless times questioning myself
late at night or in the shower. The saddest thing for me I think is
that I had a grandfather that had seen the game in its early stages,
but unfortunately passed away before the game was finished and
launched. It would have been great to have shipped the game while he
was still alive.

>What tips do you have for those that are just starting with
>programming and game development?

I'd recommend just immersing yourself in it. Play games. Ask
questions. Network. Reach out to people on the internet. In general,
it's a great community of people willing to help out.

>We may have a couple of project managers reading this interview. Any
>tips for them with regards to managing a project/interacting with
>developers?

There are a bunch of handy tools you can use, like Slack, Basecamp,
Daylite, etc. – but at the end of the day, it just comes down to
having a solid team. If the team structure is there, you'll make it
work.

>Also, we may have a couple of ad men reading this interview. Any tips
>for them with regards to marketing a game?

My biggest tip – start working on your marketing the day you start working on your game.

>You went for a premium game as opposed to a game that was free with
>IAP. Why?

We just felt like this was the right fit for the kind of experience we
made. I go into it a little here:
http://ryancash.net/post/117092406765/the-story-behind-altos-adventure

>Given hindsight is 20/20, would you have done anything differently
>with regards to building and selling Alto?

On the whole, I don't think so. There are always things you learn
along the way, but I think we had learned a lot building and shipping
five other products prior to Alto that allowed us to more or less run
smoothly this time around.

>I hate it when people say "your game is just like X". Do you have any
>thoughts on derivative works?

Most things are deviate of others. The iPod wasn't the first portable
music player. I think there's a big difference between a blatant
ripoff, and drawing inspiration (even heavily) from something else.

>The art in your game is stunning. Any comments on the art direction?

Thanks! We really wanted something that'd stand the test of time, and
something that would also stand the test of non-gamers. And what I
mean by that, is that we wanted the game to appeal to people that
didn't necessarily consider themselves a gamer. We also had the same
goal for non-snowboarders. We wanted to create a piece of art that
just happened to be a video game.

>What kind of emotional rollercoaster did you go through when your
>game was featured by Apple?

I think the majority of the rollercoaster ride occurred in the ~2
years leading up to the release. Once we hit launch day it was mostly
just a blur of excitement and sleepless nights for a couple weeks :)
