# Interview With Yacine Salmi - Ellipsis

The most concise way of describing Ellipsis is that it's
psychedelically beautiful. The control scheme/responsiveness is spot
on and the game as a whole is just extremely polished (this kind of
quality is what you should strive for).

>How old are you? What's your professional and educational background?

I'm 35. I did a BSc in software engineering as a Bachelor's and a
Master's in Games Programming (basically to help me break into the
Games Industry...it worked :)). I've worked for Criterion Games (EA)
on the Burnout Series, then at Evolution Studios (Sony) on Motorstorm
and later at Havok on their physics and destruction team. I developed
a strong core in physics and animation programming.

I should mention that we are a two-man team. My colleague Stefan Hell
is a young graduate from the Technical University of Munich and is a
talented programmer in his own right.

>What technologies/frameworks did you use to build Ellipsis?

We used Unity, which was the simplest engine to quickly prototype
with. We've had to enhance our solution with a lot of custom native
plugins and shader code to achieve the visual performance required.

>How long did it take to build?

We built it over two years, the first year being very part-time and
roughly full-time the last 11 months. Much longer than you would want
for a mobile game.

>How big is the code base?

Roughly 40k lines of code, not including custom native plugins.

>How much lifetime revenue (gross) has the game generated on iOS?

Roughly €20k so far.

>How much lifetime revenue (gross) has the game generated on Android
>(if there is one)?

Roughly €2k so far.

>During the sale and development of Ellipsis, what was one of your
>happiest moments?

Basically every time someone falls in love with the game and shares
their experiences with us. It's a short, fleeting yet incredible burst
of pleasure. Specifically:

- During public play tests when players can't seem to let go of the
  tablet.
- When Ron Carmel expressed his surprised delight at playing the
  Game. Ron is a huge inspiration and one of the reasons I got into
  games.
- When a 12-year old Brit started making fan videos of the game.

>Your saddest moments?

Hmmm, seeing all the piracy? You eventually get over it and accept
that you would never have those sales anyways, but it's a bit
disheartening to what extent people will go to pirate games from indie
developers.

>What tips do you have for those that are just starting with
>programming and game development?

Don't focus on making a hit indie game or becoming successful. Focus
on making games and releasing them and learning from your experiences
and iterating. Try to create as many ideas as you can as quickly as
you can. Release early and often. Don't be afraid of throwing away
your work and starting again. I think this is the single most
important way to become proficient in programming and game
development. Do, Test, Analyze, Repeat.

>We may have a couple of project managers reading this interview. Any
>tips for them with regards to managing a project/interacting with
>developers?

There entire books written on this subject that do it better justice,
but I would boil it down to:

- Empower your developers to make decisions and feel ownership of the
  product.
- Focus on eliminating obstacles that prevent your developers from
  making progress.
- Include them in the planning and estimation of tasks.
- Double whatever time estimate your developers give you.

>Also, we may have a couple of ad men reading this interview. Any tips
>for them with regards to marketing a game?

Focus on what makes your game unique, what makes it stand out from the
rest. Try to sell your unique story and why players should pay
attention to your game as opposed to the thousands of other great
games that come out all the time.

>You went for a premium game as opposed to a game that was free with
>IAP. Why?

Probably this was a mistake. Setting up IAP purchases required more
work (doing a validation server) and we couldn't quite figure out how
to present an IAP purchase without relying on text.

I also wanted to avoid the inevitable lower average ratings we would
receive from having a 'free' version.

However, this is possibly just hubris and trying to post-hoc justify a
decision. Doing a Free + IAP is probably  the more sensible
solution. And even now we are putting the final touches on a free demo
version which redirects you to the full game once you've finished
it. I call it "indie IAP".

>Given hindsight is 20/20, would you have done anything differently
>with regards to building and selling Ellipsis?

Honestly, it's hard to say. I think I would have considered working
with a publisher to maximize our marketing potential. We managed to
get featured on our own both on iOS and Android so it is possible to
achieve this as a small indie as long as you have a good game and you
are persistent. But I think a good mobile publisher would have been
able to multiply the amount of high profile reviews we could have
gotten.

Potentially going ad-based may have been a better idea from the start
but I still don't have enough data to fully justify it.

More than anything else, I would have tried to release Ellipsis
earlier. Still I'm not sure how we could have done it faster and kept
it to a high standard.
