# Interview With Sam Barlow - Her Story

Her Story is a very unique experience. My wife and I finished it in
one sitting and loved how we were able to casually participate in what
effectively an interactive fiction. I wanted to interview Sam because
of how different Her Story was from all the other games in the App Store.

>How old are you? What's your professional and educational
>background?

38 years old! Have a 1st class degree in Maths from University of
Bristol. I did some work in the tech/business world out of university
and then fell sideways into videogame development and have about 15
years of experience there -- mostly as a Lead Designer / Game
Director.

>What technologies/frameworks did you use to build Her Story?

Unity, Google Drive, Fade In and Final Cut!

>How long did it take to build?

14 months from blank sheet of paper to shipped game. More than six
months of that was purely on-paper work, research and ideation.

>How big is the code base?

The fact that I don't know the answer to that question might indicate
my level of coding ability -- and the extent to which things were
winged with Unity script and cut and paste.

>How much lifetime revenue (gross) has the game generated on iOS?

I can't give specifics, but the game has sold around 500K copies
across all platforms -- and the App Store accounts for a significant
portion of that.

>How much lifetime revenue (gross) has the game generated on Android
>(if there is one)?

Has just released on Google Play -- so watch this space :)

>During the sale and development of Her Story, what was one of your
>happiest moments?

The first few months of sitting out in my garden in the sun, reading
research materials and sketching out ideas in my notebook :)

>Your saddest moments?

When winter set in and I had to actually finish the thing and fix bugs
with the video plugins! :(

>What tips do you have for those that are just starting with
>programming and game development?

Make something different, that doesn't exist but you feel needs to
exist! Be pretty damn cautious about your estimates in terms of time
and money -- especially if it's your own. Be realistic about the worst
case outcomes and then -- if you can handle them -- commit to seeing
things through, come what may. Something finished and released is
worth a hundred unfinished ideas.

>We may have a couple of project managers reading this interview. Any
>tips for them with regards to managing a project/interacting with
>developers?

Invest in the upfront stuff that doesn't necessarily put results on
screen -- research, ideation, paper design. Give the project time to
breath and answer all the difficult questions before jumping into
execution.

>Also, we may have a couple of ad men reading this interview. Any tips
>for them with regards to marketing a game?

With digital distribution you don't have to sell to everyone. Identify
your niche audience and sell to them -- in some cases excluding a
larger audience. You don't want them dragging you down with poor
reviews or chatter. Put the developer's voice out there as much as
possible -- it's the thing that indie devs can do that bigger
developers can't. There's no PR machine to get in the way, so sell
that authenticity and the personal factor.

>You went for a premium game as opposed to a game that was free with
>IAP. Why?

I'm selling something that has limited content -- it's a 2-5 hour
experience. So I can't monetize the infinite gameplay loop that you
really need to if you want to make a liveable income of IAP. That
said, I went with a price that (at least for Steam) is at the lower
end of the scale -- I wanted to make it easy for people who were
interested to say yes!

>Given hindsight is 20/20, would you have done anything differently
>with regards to building and selling Her Story?

I am in the enviable position of everything having turned out better
than expected! -- from the execution of the game to the buzz around
launch through to the post-launch awards and general chatter. The
reaction from players has been amazing.

I guess the one thing that was difficult was post-launch support. I
recently pulled in a coder to help out with support and to engineer
the Android version and that was a godsend. I was super-frugal with my
planning and so didn't allow for bringing in someone external when the
game was first launched -- with hindsight, I could have allowed myself
that spend, but going into the launch I wasn't prepared to make that
bet!
