# Interview With Joe Robinson - Pocket Tactics

My first interaction with Pocket Tactics was an unsolisted mention
between their's and @ADarkRoomiOS's Twitter handle. After that
interaction, I saw that Pocket Tactics (Owen Faraday at the time)
interacted with the unsolisted mention. I took that opportunity to
immediately email Owen and see if he'd give A Dark Room a shot. Be on
a look out for these kinds of serendipitous opportunities.

>How old are you (the team)? What's your professional and educational
>background?

Pocket Tactics has been around since 2004 when it was founded by Owen
Faraday, although he has since moved on to other projects. I only took
over the website in July 2016, but the team here are a mixture of
veterans and newcomers.

My own personal background has always been in games writing. Started
right out of University and never stopped. I was doing Journalism and
realized that 'normal' news was boring as hell, so I wanted to do
something I could be passionate about.

For about two years I was also a PR, and I had planned to carry on in
that career but this opportunity came up that I couldn't resist!

>There will be a lot of indie devs reading this. With regards to
>contacting editors/reviewers to get a game reviewed, what's the
>absolute worst thing for a dev to do/get him on your instant ban
>list?

Not get a read on what the site 'is' – we focus on a lot of strategy
and more cerebral stuff here – sending us an endless runner or
something about Pokemon GO probably isn't going to work. There's an
exception to every rule though – if you think it'll suit our audience,
tell us why. NOT in PR speak, make an argument, use precedent – we
covered X game, our readers seem to talk about Y, our game has a lot
of Z you might be surprised about.

>There will be a lot of indie devs reading this. With regards to
>contacting editors/reviewers to get a game reviewed, what's the
>absolute best thing for a dev to do/get him in your graces?

It's the little things – providing a short summary and a bit on why it
suits Pocket Tactics always helps. You can be more detailed further
down, but I'll probably only read the first few bits to get what I
need to know. Provide code. Providing code on Android and iOS is also
really useful.

I also quite like the personal touch. I know mass mails are easy, but
if you write them well I won't know its a mass mail, and if you do
take the time to actually talk to me directly then you're more likely
to hold my attention.

>What are your thoughts on premium games vs free with IAP? Why is it
>so hard for consumers to fork over $3.99 (or any amount of income)
>for a premium game? Have we just become numb to ads and energy bars?

I'm not smart enough to be able to talk about this with any great
authority, but my gut tells me it's a combination of psychological
factors, and the fact that mobile games started off with things like
Snake. As fun as Snake was, I wouldn't have paid for it, and despite
phones (and games on phones) getting better, that perception will
never truly go away.

There's nothing wrong with IAP's, but the problem is the rather
cynical version of the free-to-play model that's evolved around this
concept. I'd more happily pay for a game once, because I know I won't
have to deal with IAP-led design decisions, but I'm not against a
decently made F2P title. CCG's like Hearthstone have the best track
record in this area so far I feel.

>I'm starting to release unfinished games and then iterate on them
>publicly. The first couple of months, the game is free, and then I
>start charging for it after it's more playable. Believe it or not,
>it's working! Am I insane? How would this affect editorials and
>reviews?

This is not so dissimilar to what Notch did with Minecraft, and that
is one of the most successful games of all time – it always astounds
me that big game companies repeatedly fail to learn valuable lessons
from high profile cases like these.

In terms of the content cycle, it poses a similar challenge to Early
Access, but it simply requires a slight change in approach. Generally,
the preview/review cycle is kind of broken – people resonate more with
interesting or niche features that use a game as a springboard, so
with respect to your specific example, we would perhaps do an intro
piece, then spin-off various features along the dev cycle, and then
maybe a more reflective 'review' when/if it hit's 'Version 1.0'.

>How do you think live streaming will affect mobile gaming? Let's play
>YouTube videos?

Indie PC games have gone through a bit of a renaissance thanks to the
advent of Twitch and YouTube. Even without 'easy' methods of streaming
mobile footage, there have already been high profile cases of YouTube
directly contributing to the success of a game. Their social clout
cannot be underestimated, and the easier it gets to cast footage from
a mobile device, the more often this will happen. They're more
relevant than traditional media, it's sad to say, in terms of mass
market appeal.

>What do you think the future of mobile gaming holds for indie game
>devs? Doom and gloom? Bright future?

Mobile devices are going to outlive consoles, maybe even PC's. The
future's bright, but the issue of discoverability is never going to go
away and will probably get worse over time until a 'crises'
essentially resets the board.

>How can game devs better support editors/reviewers (and more
>specifically Pocket Tactics)?

If a dev is engaging in community management, maintain a presence on
our forums is always nice. It allows them their own personal conduit
to our most engaging readers, and it relieves some of the pressure off
us in terms of content.

Being pro-active helps as much as I'd love to know everything
releasing all the time, a lot of things will slip by, especially
because my team is small. If you want to talk to me, reach out!
