# Interview With Kepa Auwae - Wayward Souls

Wayward Souls is a "true to the genre" rougelike. The music, controls,
graphics all bring back so many nostalgic memories of being a kid and
playing a great hack and slash RPG. Wayward Souls was competing for
the top charts around the same time as ADR. It was one of the few
games I felt were honorable (not your run of the mill novel/casual iOS
game). The Rocketcat Games studio has both premium and free + IAP
games (a lot like Philipp Stollenmayer).

>Mind telling us a little bit about yourself and the team?
>Specifically age, professional, and educational background?

I was a pediatric nurse about 8 years ago. I decided to be a game
developer one night. It was pretty arbitrary. I was 25 at the time. I
made a team with a couple of friends, who were also game devs.

We got into iOS fairly early, but missed the "gold rush" by a little
bit. The gold rush being when there weren't many games on the App
Store, so there were lots of big hits. Our first game still made
enough where we could go part time on our main jobs, and our second
game did well enough to go full time.

>With regards to Wayward Souls, Punch Quest, and Five Card Quest, what
>technologies/languages did you use to build the games? How large are
>the code bases? How long did they take you to make?

All custom engines. Usually a year or so of tech per game, then the
rest of the design follows. Then further games reuse the same engine,
usually with another year of tech development.

>I like to be as transparent as possible with revenue, if that's
>something you can share, that would be awesome. What's the life time
>revenue for Punch Quest, Five Card Quest, and Wayward Souls?

Wayward made over 500k (vague number), the others made roughly half.

>Between iOS and Android, which platform has brought in the most
>revenue? Percentage breakdown?

iOS makes the most. I think Android accounts to maybe 30%.

>What were some of the happiest moments during the development of your
>games?

Well, lots of happy moments. Pretty much when any game succeeds and
gets a lot of critical and fan success. We've been really lucky.

>The saddest moments?

The first game was the worst because we had no guarantee at all that
it would be successful. We also had very harsh hours, because we were
working on it with our limited spare time. Just wasting weekends on
it. Easily could have given up during the development, but we didn't.

>What tips do you have for those that are just starting with
>programming and game development?

Save up money before going off on your own. That or do contract work.

>We may have a couple of project managers reading this interview. Any
>tips for them with regards to managing a project/interacting with
>developers?

For me it's kind of dumb luck stumbling onto a team that are very
independent and don't need to be closely watched. It's very important
to get the right people on the team. As for knowing who the right
people are instead of just stumbling onto them, I think that takes
experience.

>Also, we may have a couple of ad men reading this interview. Any tips
>for them with regards to marketing a game?

We always used the Toucharcade forums for mobile games. Especially the
Upcoming Games Thread. The fans of the site read the forums. The
reviewers on the site check the forums to see what the fans are
responding to. I can't prove it, but I've always thought that Apple
reads Toucharcade and the other major mobile sites.

>Between Wayward Souls, Five Card Quest, and Punch Quest, you have
>games that are both premium and free to play with IAP. Do you have
>any insight with regards to when to choose premium vs free to play?

I'll go free-to-play if I'm designing an extremely mass market
game. Punch Quest, our free game, probably wasn't even mass market
enough to justify being free. You have to design your free to play
game for the biggest audience possible, which means the most general
mass market appeal possible. I'm thinking a game played with one
finger or thumb is the ideal, especially ones that don't require
finger dexterity. I think games like Temple Run started a trend of
showing that arcade-style games with some finger dexterity can work,
if they're still based around very simple controls. But something that
doesn't require dexterity generally is safer for the "mass market"
idea.

Otherwise I'd just go paid. All my games except Punch Quest are
paid. I've been hearing bad things about paid recently, though soon
I'll see how things are there for myself once we launch Death Road to
Canada.

>I think it was really cool that you released an early version of
>Wayward Souls, and told people that with every iOS update, you'd
>raise the price. How did the incremental development and pricing
>strategy work out for you?

It wasn't even really an early version. It was the full game, minus
some extra stuff we had planned before the launch but didn't
necessarily plan to get in for the release. We'd add tweaks based on
feedback, along with major content updates like all new areas.

It worked very well. Every update was a warning to get the game before
the price increase. The steady price increase as an
"anti-sale"... instead of people waiting for the game to go on
discount, they'd actually get it. And the game never went on sale,
either.

>Given hindsight is 20/20, would you have done anything differently
>with regards to building and selling your games?

I'd maybe have tried to get on PC about a year earlier.

>Your games have been featured a number of times with Apple, any tips
>with regards to getting featured by Apple?

They've known I've made games for years now. Getting covered by major
sites can help a lot there.

>Any other tips with regards to getting featured by Apple? Any "must
>do this or don't come crying to me" kind of stuff?

Post on the Toucharcade "Upcoming Games" forums.
